Hello and welcome back to the course on database's.
All right so you've made it all the way to the third normal form.
I'm very excited to see you in this to Tauriel and congratulations.
So that means you've passed the first normal form and the second normal form which together are you
know quite a challenge.
They're pretty complex to understand.
So hopefully you've allowed for some time and maybe even some practice to let that knowledge sink in.
Because today we've got a super exciting and same time super.
I would say non-trivial challenge ahead of us.
It's the third normal form.
So let's dive straight into it.
What is the third normal form.
All right so by definition a table is in a third normal form.
If it is in a second normal form makes sense right.
And every non-prime attribute is non transitively dependent on every candidate key.
All right.
So that might sound like a lot of jibberish at this stage so very confusing and totally understand totally
agree if you.
But for now let's just let that sink in and let's have a look at our mnemonic so to understand how we
can just reconstruct this definition if we need to.
If for some reason we get lost and we just have them mnemonic in front of us which we remember and move
that one about the truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth.
Right.
So the key the whole key and nothing but the key.
So every non-prime attribute must provide a fact about the key the whole key and nothing but the key.
So again just like in the case of the second normal form we can see that we hear every candidate key
but here we're just talking about the individual key.
So the correct definition is of course this one.
So just remember in human a monarch you also need to replace the key with every candidate key just as
we did in the second normal form.
And so basically now we're talking about and nothing but the key.
So if you just have this mnemonic in your mind and you just talk through it every non-prime attribute
must provide the fact about the key the whole can nothing but the key there is very easy to reconstruct
that we're talking about and nothing but the key.
And then here was saying every non-parametric is non transitively dependent on every candidate.
So basically now you'll see that non transitively means that the non-prime attribute must be dependent
on the candidate key rather than something else in between some other column that's standing in between
this attribute and the candidate.
So it has to be dependent on the key itself not something else.
All right so we've talked quite a lot through the definition now let's have a look at an example to
understand exactly how it works.
OK so here we've got our example.
Tournament winners.
So we've got a tournament.
So these are tournaments which looks like golf.
We've gotten down invitations in Cleveland open there's one masters and Indiana intuitional again.
And so the question here is is this table in conformity with the third normal form does it match or
does it meet the criteria of the third normal form.
Well let's check Well first of all let's check the first normal form in the second form right.
So does it meet the criteria of the first normal form.
It is good practice for us.
So first normal form it does it does it have duplicate rows.
No it doesn't look like it has a black rose and we'd assume that further down it doesn't either.
But just based on these rows we can see it doesn't and does any of the columns any cells does any of
the cells have more than one value in them.
Nope looks like all the cells have just individual ballots good so it conforms to the first form or
form does it conform to the second normal form.
Well in order to answer that question we need to find out if all of the known prime attributes are dependent
on the whole of each of the candidate keys.
Right.
So first of all we'll need to identify the candidate keys in this table.
We have just the one candidate key and make sense right.
If we looking at tournament winners then it would be the tournament and the year in which that tournament
was held because tournaments sometimes are annual So they held on a recurring basis.
So just a tournament by itself is not a sufficient column to be a candidate.
But a hundred plus year ideas.
And then you will have the winner.
So this is kind of like the tournament and then based on the tournament and the year like this kind
of key you will find out the winner and the winner.
Date of Birth.
Right.
So that's our candidate and that's our only candidate.
You can also check that by looking at other combinations of columns.
And so the question is from here is each one of these or are these non-prime actually so these are our
primary concern because they're in Canada kids or in in the only kind of key.
And these are our non-prime attributes because they are not found in any of the candidate keys.
And the question is is each one of these non-prime attributes dependent on this whole key right.
Or is it maybe dependent on just part of it.
So let's have a look.
So is the winner.
Say Al Frederiksen is the winner column dependent on both of these right.
Can you just by knowing the tournament can you tell who the winner is.
No you can't because you need to know the tournament name and the date to find out the winner because
in the year in different years at the same tournament would could have easily could have different winners.
Same thing can you tell who the winner is just by the year.
Well no you cannot because in one year you'll have many different tournaments and therefore you cannot
tell them.
Same logic goes for date of birth.
So basically both of these non-prime attributes are fully dependent on the whole of this candidate.
So this table does meet the second normal form.
The question is does it meet the third normal form.
Well let's have a look.
That's how a candidate key.
And the third normal form if we go back says that every non-prime attribute which are these two here
is non transitively dependent on every candidate key.
So basically this dependency which we just checked that the winner is depending on the tournament and
you're the winner.
Date of Birth is depending on the tournament year.
Right so this dependency has to be non-trans non-trans.
Well let's have a look.
We've got the tournament in here.
And while the winner.
Right.
So tournament year the winner is indeed dependent on the tournament and you're the winner.
Date of birth isn't directly dependent on you.
Yes of course by knowing that you're looking at you looking at the Cleveland opening in the year 1999
and you want to find out the winner.
The date of birth for the winner right you is uniquely identified by the combination of these two columns.
But it's not uniquely identified through them just through them.
It's a uniquely identified through this transition through the winter.
So you have to go.
All right.
Who was the winner.
What was that when his date of birth.
Right so it's not like just knowing knowing the tournament year.
You know you're going to establish the date of birth this winter date of birth is tied directly to the
winner.
Right so that is what we mean by Tredrea and transitively So this is a transitive dependency for instance
this first one is a non transitive dependency because the winner is directly dependent on the tournament.
Whereas when the date of birth is transitively dependent on the kenned keep.
So therefore this table does not meet the criteria for the third normal form.
Question again how why is that important.
Right.
So we understand now the definition of the third normal form and we also understand what exactly means
in this example but what does why is that important in real life.
Why is it important for us to look out for in real databases what is important for us.
Why is it good.
Why is it better to have a table that all like What's the difference between a table that is compline
to third normal form and a table that's not compliant with our normal form.
Well the answer is again about two things.
First one is duplication of work.
Right so if you want to update this table and you want to add another tournament in another year with
another winner if it so happens that that winter has already been a winter previously you will be replicating
the date of birth again.
Right so here's a good example.
Al Frederiksen won the Indiana Invitational and Alfredsson won the day.
One masters night in 98 and 99.
So basically his birthday is here twice and that's unnecessary to have you.
And there's no no really no real reason to store this information twice.
Right.
So you really know the birthday of al Frederiksen Why is this information here twice and what that means
is first of all the processing speed when you're putting information to the database will be slower.
So and like these this again this is very very My minor example doesn't seem like all.
But when you're dealing with tables with millions or even billions of rows being added per hour.
Right.
This is a massive difference or even adding one column or imagine like a hundred columns that have this
transitive dependency.
If you're updating 100 columns for a billion rows that's 100 billion unnecessary updates that you're
doing.
And like large organizations really struggle of this.
They these processes these processes they run overnight usually so they run after everybody's gone home
like I don't know maybe from me.
It depends right so it depends on the organization.
But maybe like from 2:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. this four hour window that they have to run all of these
updates into their databases especially transactional databases and when this happens you've you've
got a lot of time being wasted.
And also it's in storage right.
So this information requires space on the hard drives or solid state drives and therefore it's additional
storage.
So that's that's problem number one problem the.
Is this structure this design is more prone to errors.
Right so if you've got the data data twice or several times every time you input the sorrow you don't
just duplicating the data but you also there's also a chance that you might do an error it might create
an error.
So if you put the wrong date of birth by accident then you've got a problem in the database so it's
not going to match up to the other date of birth and the birth of that person.
And that's just basically is incorrect information so if you can avoid inputting information you'll
have less chance of creating errors in your database.
So that's the disadvantages of the table not being in third normal form.
So let's see how we can fix this and put this table or this design changes designed for this information
to indeed be in third normal form.
So there we go.
This is how you do it would split up into two tables and it's quite straightforward here so we've got
the tournament winners table which we had Preece but we just took the dates of birth and we separated
them into a separate table.
So here we've got the tournament the year and the winner and then if you need to look up the date of
birth of the winner you go to the supper table and by their name you will be able to find them and find
the date of birth.
And so let's find out if these tables conform to the criteria of the third normal form.
All right so we need to identify our candidate keys So here we've got our tournament and year.
That's our calendar here just as it was in the previous version of the table.
And here we've got the winner.
The winners are Canada key here basically because the winner uniquely identifies or the person uniquely
identifies each row and then you can pick up their date of birth.
And so now we just need to check if each one of these if each one of these tables is in the third normal
form.
Right so we would check the first normal form.
Yes we all know.
They both fit the first animal form because there's no duplicate rows and also only one individual value
in each in each cell.
Then the second normal form we would check that this non prime non-prime key non-prime attribute though
in this case the winner is dependent on the whole of the candidate key which is correct.
We check that for the previous table and the date of birth this non-prime attribute is dependent on
the whole the kind of key that's by default because he cannot split this candid kids consists of one
column only and then would check the third normal form.
We want to see that indeed there is no
transitive dependencies present.
So basically that each one of the prime non-prime attributes is non transitively dependent on the candidate
key.
Well in this case we only have one on prime attributes right so it has to be transitively dependent
and we've already checked that for winter actually previously and here same thing.
We've got this non-prime attribute and it is non-trans it is heavily dependent on winter.
It's a direct functional dependency.
So that's of very functional dependency.
And here that's all for direct functional dependence.
So there we go so there's several meets three criteria.
This will meet the three criteria and we have a design a database design that is compliant with the
three NF criteria so that is in the third normal form.
And so what is great about this.
Well what is great is now that we going when we and never we add new records which the tournament the
year and the winner.
And then if it's in you win or we just add them to the winners dates of birth and we will get their
information from there.
We will get there we'll be able to get their date of birth from there.
And that way we don't store that information well so we don't actually have to add more and more and
more information all the time and unnecessary information and speed up the processing and also reduce
the amount of space and also reduce possibility of error because dates of birth are stored separately.
So that's how the third normal form works.
Just a quick note here.
If you're wondering if what if somebody has two winners have the same name and surname.
Well in that case that's a kind of a different issue.
Separate issue you would have to identify people somehow differently like you would have to replace
when or with an ID or something.
So it's a bit of a different issue in this case you need to just deal with it separately but like in
this hour in our simplified example we're just assuming that winners will all have unique names names
or name combinations.
And the good news is that this third normal form of databases is is very very powerful.
It is one of the top normalisation forms of databases there are higher levels.
You've got the boys called normalization which is like a 3.5 normal form.
Then you've got the fourth normal form you get the fifth normal form.
But those are like unnecessarily complex and they bring in efficiency or they add value.
But it is rare That's the third normal form is not sufficient so most a third normal form tables are
free from Update insertion and deletion anomalies so the stuff that we were talking about that when
you add a new record or you update or you delete a record there is problems there can be problems with
errors or errors can arise well in the third normal form.
Most tables are you know situations are taken care of and all of these unnecessary all this unnecessary
room for error has been mitigated so very rarely would you need to go further than the third normal
form.
So that is why you know probably like I say a number of top my head but if I had to guess I would say
like 80 or 90 percent of the tables that you can deal with third normal form is sufficient.
And moreover the third normal form is a is an ideal a normal form for dealing with online transaction
processing so all l t p applications and that have very high computation requires that you know input
lots millions and millions of transactions into the databases.
But we'll talk more about that in the Tauriel on pros and cons of normalization.
But just I just wanted to congratulate you on you know learning about the third normal form because
it is somewhat the pinnacle of a normalization of databases and it's a huge step in this pathway in
learning about database design and structure so hopefully enjoyed today's tutorial and hopefully all
of this makes sense.
And again it is not it's all non-trivial stuff so go through it a couple times give it some time to
sink in and eventually it'll become like second nature especially especially if you remember that mnemonic
that Monica about the the key the whole key and nothing but the key.
And on that note I'm going to end today's Tauriel.
It was a fun one quite quite a long one but definitely worth it.
And I look forward to seeing you next time.
Until then happy analyzing.